good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street press conference I'm
joined this afternoon by dr. Jenny
Harris the deputy chief medical officer
as housing secretary I'm going to set
out our comprehensive plan to safely
restart reopen and renew the housing
market but first I want to update you on
the latest data on the coronavirus
response two million ninety four
thousand two hundred and nine tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
the United Kingdom including eighty
seven thousand and sixty three tests
carried out yesterday two hundred and
twenty nine thousand seven hundred and
five people have tested positive that's
an increase of three thousand two
hundred and forty two cases since
yesterday
eleven thousand three hundred and twenty
seven people are in hospital with kovat
nineteen down fifteen percent from
thirteen thousand two hundred and
seventy three cases last week and sadly
of those tested positive for coronavirus
across all settings thirty-three
thousand 186 have now died that's an
increase of 494 fatalities since
yesterday these figures include deaths
in all settings not just in hospitals
before turning to the housing market I
want to remind people of how we will
address this phase of our fight against
kovat 19 firstly and if we could turn to
the first slide thank you in order to
monitor our progress we are establishing
a new co vid alert level system with
five levels each relating to the level
of threat posed by the virus the alert
level we based primarily on the r-value
and the number of coronavirus cases and
in turn that alert level will determine
the level of so
distancing measures in place the lower
the level the fewer the measures the
higher the level the stricter the
measures the social distancing measures
remain critical in our efforts to
control the virus throughout the period
of lockdown which started in March the
23rd
we've been at level four meaning a
covert 19 epidemic is in general
circulation and transmission is high or
rising exponentially thanks to the hard
work and the sacrifices of the British
people in the lockdown we've helped to
bring the our level down now that we are
in a position to begin moving to level 3
we will do so in time in careful steps
if we turn to Slide 2 we set out the
first of three steps will take to
carefully modify the measures and
gradually ease the lockdown and begin to
allow people to return to their way of
life but crucially doing so while
avoiding what would be a disastrous
second peak that could overwhelm the NHS
after each step we will closely monitor
the impact of that on the are and the
number of infections and all the
available data will be used and will
only take the next step when we're
satisfied that it's completely safe to
do so
the first step from this week will be as
follows those who cannot work from home
should now speak to their employer about
going back to work
you can now spend time outdoors and
exercise as often as you like you can
meet one person outside your household
in an outdoor public place provided that
you stay two metres apart the second
step from the 1st of June of the
earliest as long as the data allows we
will aim to do the following
primary schools to reopen for some
pupils in smaller classes non-essential
retail to start to reopen when and where
it's safe to do so cultural and sporting
events to take place behind closed doors
without crowds and then step three no
earlier than the fourth of July and
again only if the data says it's safe to
do so
we aim to allow the following more
businesses and premises to open
including potentially those offering
personal care such as leisure facilities
public places and places of worship and
on that last point I've been speaking to
faith leaders and will convene later
this week a task force to establish when
and how places of worship can open
safely for some of the practices where
social distancing can take place such as
private pilot prayer potentially private
prayer being able to be carried out
earlier than July the fourth many of
these businesses and organizations will
need to operate in new ways to ensure
that they're safe and we will work with
those sectors and individuals on how to
do this if we turn to the third slide
having taken the first step in carefully
adjusting some of the measures and our
advice to people on what to do we've
also updated what we are asking people
to do which is to stay alert to control
the virus and to save lives for many
people the appropriate course still
means staying at home as much as
possible
but there are a range of other actions
we're advising people to take when they
do go out to work or for other
activities limiting contact with other
people keeping distance when you do go
out 2 meters apart wherever possible
washing your hands regularly wearing a
face covering when you're in an enclosed
space where it's difficult to be
socially distant for example in some
shops or on public transport and if you
or anyone in your household has symptoms
you all need to self isolate this side
sets out some of the activities you can
now do and as I'll come on to later
you'll see that you can now move house
on the fourth slide if everyone stays
alert and follows these rules we can
control coronavirus by keeping the are
down and reducing the number of
infections this is how we will continue
to save lives and livelihoods and we can
begin as a nation to recover from
coronavirus and as we begin to recover
it's essential that we cautiously open
up parts of our economy where it's safe
to do so now earlier today in Parliament
I made a statement setting out our clear
coherent and comprehensive plan to
restart reopen and renew the housing
market and our construction industry I'm
sure this will be of interest to many
people at home who are hoping to move
house and I'd like to set out what this
means in more detail from today anyone
in England can move house if they follow
the new guidance that we've published on
gov dot UK when the lockdown was
announced in March tweet changed the
rules so that people could only move
home if they thought it was reasonably
necessary that meant that more than four
hundred and fifty thousand buyers had to
put their plans on hold and each month
three hundred thousand tenancies come up
for renewal as well a significant
proportion of these will result in
people needing to or wanting to move
home the pressure to move for some was
becoming acute with serious legal and
financial
and health implications during an
already difficult time these people have
been stuck in limbo now they can carry
on with their house moves and add some
certainty to their lives so from today
estate agents offices can reopen
viewings whether virtual or in-person
are permitted show homes can open and
removal companies and the other
essential parts of the sales and the
lettings process are restarted with
immediate effect for most people moving
home is not a luxury people decide to
move home because their personal
circumstances change the changes that
I've announced today are happening
safely in order to control the virus and
to protect the public we've published
very detailed guidance informed by
public health advice to explain how this
can be achieved with all parties
observing hygiene measures and social
distancing guidelines people have asked
why would they be able to look around a
stranger's home but not visit their
parents or loved ones at home now I
understand why this may seem confusing
at first glance especially when people
have been separated from their loved
ones for so long but our guidelines make
clear that in the first instance
viewings should happen
virtually when viewings do happen in
person we've set out a clear plan to
ensure the safety of everybody involved
in the property itself those considering
moving in and the estate agents and
letting agents these requirements
include visits being by appointment only
open house viewings should not be taking
place and speculative viewings where
buyers or tenants are not serious yet
are highly discouraged all parties
should follow strict social distancing
guidelines all internal doors should be
where possible the current occupier
should vacate the property for the
duration of the visit going out for
their daily exercise going out to the
shops or standing in the garden if
that's possible all involved in the
process should wash their hands upon
entering the property and once the
viewing has taken place all the surfaces
in the property including the door
handles should be thoroughly cleaned
there are of course exceptions for those
who are self isolating or have
coronavirus they should not be moving or
going back to work or allowing trades
people or professionals into their home
where this is the case all parties
involved in house buying or selling
should prioritize amicable sensible
arrangements to change the move dates
for the individuals concerned that's
been happening across the country in
recent weeks and it will need to
continue we would also ask those who are
clinically vulnerable and those who are
shielding to consider very carefully
their personal situation and to seek
personal and specific medical advice
before deciding whether to commit to or
to proceed with moving home if you're in
this situation and you decide that you
must go ahead all professionals involved
should be made aware so that they can
put in place any additional
precautionary measures to provide
further protection for your health and
further legal protection to make sure
that the transaction goes as smoothly as
can be expected a vibrant housing market
means more than buying and selling homes
we need to get building again and
Britain needs that it's something that
this government has always been
committed to something that our
ambitious first Homes program will do
later this year with a 30 percent
discount on new homes for key workers
including nurses and teachers and police
officers as well as local first-time
buyers we want them to be ready as soon
as possible and that's just one of the
reasons why I'm keen to get construction
and running to help with this I'm today
announcing further steps to support safe
house building by allowing more flexible
working hours on construction sites
where it's appropriate and with local
consent I'm allowing sites to apply to
extend their working hours again with
immediate effect to 9:00 p.m. Monday to
Saturday in residential areas and beyond
that in non residential areas and
setting out a very clear government
position that these applications should
be approved by local councils unless
there are very compelling reasons not to
do so there its start and finish times
will make it much easier for sites to
observe social distancing take the
pressure off public transport like the
tube in London and keep Brittain
building there are countless examples of
the industry behaving responsibly and
proactively during this pandemic I'd
like to thank today Taylor Wimpey who
have now got construction safely
underway on the majority of their sites
and have started removing staff from the
furlough scheme and getting back to work
on full pay they are offering a discount
of 5% for NHS staff and care workers on
new homes a great way to recognize the
contribution that our frontline heroes
are making across the country so thank
you to them it's also time that the
planning system makes more use of
digital technology to operate remotely
and efficiently join this pandemic I'm
determined that the planning
Inspectorate is at the forefront of this
work and I welcome the Inspectorate now
undertaking its first ever virtual
hearings I'm asking them to make all
hearings virtual within weeks so the
planning system can resume and be made
more permanently accessible and
user-friendly this is the most
comprehensive restarting of an industry
in the first phase of our roadmap with
few if any transactions
there is no visibility and no precedent
with which to accurately judge the state
of the housing market but history tells
us that in every economic recovery in
modern British economic life the housing
market has been key to recovery and
revival as housing secretary I will do
everything I can to support the millions
of people employed in the construction
and the housing industries to help their
sector bounce back world's always
prioritizing their safety and well-being
almost 100 separate organizations have
already signed up to the Charter for
safe working practice pledging that they
will share the responsibility to ensure
that their sites operate safely and in
accordance with government advice I'd
like to thank all of those who signed
and encouraged the whole industry to
join them today we reopen we restart and
we renew the housing market and the
construction industry to protect lives
to save jobs and to begin rebuilding our
economy thank you
I'll now hand over to dr. Harris Jenny
thank you so I'm going to run through
some of the slides which show how we've
been doing as a nation in managing
social distancing this side represents
the changes in our transport use it's
compared to traffic on buses from
earlier in the year usage and rail from
last year and you can see that all of
the different types of transport the
reduction in use has been more than 50
percent except of course in our heavy
goods vehicles which are transporting
essential items for us and it's
important for us to watch that it's been
a real strong indicator of how
successful the social distancing policy
has been and that's has obviously
translated through to a reduction in the
number of infections that we've seen
and the pressures on our hospitals and
we'll be monitoring that continuously as
we go forward next slide please
this slide shows the current situation
on testing and new cases the testing so
as at nine o'clock this morning eighty
seven thousand and sixty three tests
were completed in the previous 24 hours
and that brings the total of tests that
have been completed to well over two
million we have capacity well over that
and that will take us forward into
supporting our testing in particular hot
spots so care homes and in hospitals
where we want to ensure we have maximal
capacity but absolutely increasingly
with our tests and tres program so
having that capacity there will allow us
to go forward as the number of cases
drop and we can see in the bottom half
of the slide the number of confirmed
cases so just in the cases confirmed on
the 13th of May 3242 again two hundred
and twenty nine thousand seven hundred
and five
cases confirmed in total of course we we
recognized that not all cases will be
counted here these are laboratory
confirmed cases but even so as our
testing capacity has increased we can
see that the number of confirmed cases
continues to decrease and that's a very
positive sign as we move forward next
slide please
so this slide represents the current
information from our hospitals it's
collected slightly differently across
the UK nations so in the top half of the
slide you can see that the number of
admissions on the 11th May was 711 and
if we look at the week before that
that's down from just under a thousand
so again a continuous downward trend in
hospital admissions clearly it's still
important that we recognize there are a
significant number of people getting ill
and needing support in our hospitals
that represents huge amounts of work
still on the
frontline for health care workers but
nevertheless it's a positive trend but
it's a slow one and we need to ensure
that social distancing continues through
this next phase of the plan and on the
bottom half of the slide again the fewer
patients who are coming into hospital
it's the proportion of the sickest the
sickest numbers of those patients who
then go on to need critical care beds
and that you can see in all of the
nations has decreased over the period
you can see the epidemic curve but I
think particularly important where we
have been concerned previously as we
were rising up that curve about capacity
to deal with critical care just 21
percent of critical Barre care beds are
occupied with Cova dents next time
police and it's important to recognize
that although there is some variation
across the country everywhere we concede
that there has been a peak and there is
now a plateau under general trend
downwards London clearly had a
significant peak and in other areas the
shape of that curve is flatter it does
mean that again we need to keep really
careful about social distancing and
applying all the control measures to
manage the virus as we go forward but
nevertheless you can see that 11,000 327
people in hospital and that's down from
modern to say or just about 2000 higher
than that last week so a continuous
trend downwards next slide please
and this is the the last slide so these
are the confirmed deaths from every
every part of the system not just
hospital deaths as so sadly there have
been 494 tests confirmed with a positive
laboratory test in the last 24 hours and
33,000 overall but again you can see
that reflection of the downward trend
carrying on as we go forward thank you
thanks very much
Jenny well our first question comes from
a member of the public and it's from
Michael
who is in London I'm one of the many
thousands of people working within the
theater and performing arts industries
it is clear there will be many months
before theaters reopen and customers
feel comfortable enough to come again
will the government pledged to protect
these industries that will be without
any income for quite some time well a
very good question from Michael and I
think all of us who care about the arts
are very concerned for the future of
theaters museums and galleries
performing arts all of those who work in
this sector
which is incredibly important to the UK
one of our great international strengths
and something that's important for our
well-being as well as a country and as
individuals we have made available the
unprecedented economic support package
that the Chancellor has brought forward
to many of the organizations within the
arts and so the furlough scheme for
example which is paying part of the
wages of millions of our fellow citizens
today is available to some of those
organisations for those people who are
self-employed there's also the
Treasury's scheme there which launched
today and so I would refer self-employed
people working within the arts to that
if it's applicable to them and the
culture secretary is also working very
closely with our main cultural
institutions to see how we can guide
them through undoubtedly a very
difficult period of time and to put in
place the social distancing guidelines
so that they are ready to reopen when
the science and the medical opinion
allows and as you'll see from the
roadmap that we've set out we hope that
that will be later this summer but it is
very conditional upon continuing to keep
the rate of infection down and
continuing to control the virus of which
of course we've all got an important
part to play the second question is from
Laura who is from Ross and
and Laura asks there was a lot of talk
about people being able to meet up in
fact meet up in family clusters or
bubbles where are when are we likely
sorry to see this put in place well the
guidance that we've set out in this
first phase doesn't propose that it says
that you can go out more you can
exercise in public places and when
you're out in those public settings like
parks for example you can meet up with
one person from outside of your family
as long as you maintain social
distancing so you can sit on a park
bench or you can go for a walk
talking to them as long as you're two
meters apart and if Jenny you want to is
anything you'd like to about and what
the longer term yes trajectory might be
for meeting up with family members I
mean just to say it's a very important
public health issue as well not simply
from the control of infection
perspective but because we do recognize
that people who particularly those have
been on their own or who are isolated
from others would very much welcome this
it will be a very strong positive mental
health boost I think quite apart from
anything else but it does get quite
complicated and I don't want to run the
risk of going back to some of my other
social advice but there are it gets to
make it a very fair intervention and
consistent with public health advice it
can get quite technical so for example
if you have families with large numbers
already in their families who want to
meet her you end up effectively with
quite a large gathering even if it's
just two families meeting and I think
it's really important that we think
through the implications of that
particularly across families in
different circumstances if your family
is a long way away for example you may
be less able to do that but recognize
what the benefits will be I think for
individuals and we are able to put in
public health advice to some of those
decisions thanks Jenny
now the first question from member the
media is Laura Coons Berg from the BBC
good afternoon Laura good afternoon
thank you very much Secretary of State
and why is it that the government can't
seem to get a grip on the crisis in care
Holmes and dr. Harris could I asked you
is it right for some hospitals to be
trying to persuade care homes to take in
patients who have tested positive for
the virus well thank you Laura
care homes are the absolute heart of all
the work that we're now doing across
government it's essential that we
provide them with the support that they
need and deserve today the Prime
Minister announced a further 600 million
pounds of financial support that will be
given to councils and flow-through to
care homes so that they can fund the
changes that we're asking them to do
which will include better infection
control within care homes bringing that
up to the highest standards if they're
not doing so already insuring there's
less rotation or staff particularly
agency workers between care homes so we
can shield those care homes that haven't
had outbreaks as much as we possibly can
ensuring that there are named contacts
within councils and the NHS for each
care home particularly the smaller care
homes the smaller independent care homes
you might have traditionally less
connection with their local council
ensuring that they're getting the
support that they need to put in place
all of those measures obviously
continuing to ensure that they get the
personal protective equipment that they
need and the testing both for residents
and for care workers whether they're
symptomatic or asymptomatic and we're
using all of the levers that we have in
the testing infrastructure to make that
as accessible as possible whether it's
giving them privileged access to testing
through their employers and also
ensuring that the mobile testing units
that we have in many cases operated by
the Ministry of Defence are going to
places that are convenient for care
homes in some cases to their own carpark
so that the staff are getting the tests
that they need Jenny thank you and so
you asked a very important question
about if actually good infection
prevention control when patients are
moving and obviously many of the elderly
care home residents will be some of our
most vulnerable patients really
important to remember that if a patient
has gone into hospital been tested
positive
nobody phased them and have had the
disease and recovered they will still be
marked as a positive test but very
unlikely to be infectious after a long
period of convalescence in hospital so I
think we're not talking about that but
what's really important in this the test
is is an important element but it is
about the systems of good infection
control both in the hospital and in the
receiving care home and that is the
fundamental basis whether it be covered
or anything else of managing patients
carefully the same sorts of issues arise
to a degree with in flu and with
norovirus which will be aware of but I
think here although every potential care
resident new moving care resident is
tested now in hospitals there is an
important element here one is even prior
to that testing there was a policy
whereby an individual who is moving into
a care home would be retained if you
like in safe isolation within the care
home because it was recognized that this
was a risk group so they are all having
a test now but they would have been
treated in much the same way for quite a
few weeks before this but I think it
does come down to a degree of local
discretion I know NHS England colleagues
have sent out very clear instructions to
hospitals to support the testing to make
sure that it's done in a convenient time
period before the patient is due for
discharge and to have local
conversations about this where on
occasion I think it is not the rule
there are difficulties clearly at the
center of all of these discussions is
often a very elderly and quite
vulnerable individual and it's really
important that they are managed in the
way which is best for their health and
everybody else's infection risk but also
their personal life as well thanks Laura
do you have a follow-up question yes I
mean you've listed some of the actions
that the government's announcing today
and but we are now two months since the
first case was recorded in a care home
and there aren't enough tests there
isn't still enough kit we hear from care
homes around the country care home
managers are desperately worried about
what's going on
you know why does it seem day after day
that the government is not getting a
grip on this
well I don't underestimate the challenge
being faced by residents and staff of
care homes the package of support that
we're giving today builds on the work
that we've been doing for many weeks now
with respect to PPE for example we've
delivered tens of millions of items of
PPE to care homes through local
resilience forums across the country
testing has been going on for some time
it they're sure they're I'm sure there
is more that we can do but we've now
brought the capacity for testing
nationally up to a hundred and ten
thousand and we need to ensure that it's
focused on the people who need it the
most including the care home workers
there is more that we can do and our
whole focus now needs to be on ensuring
that care homes are guided through the
weeks and months ahead and we protect as
many people as we possibly can within
them thanks Laura the next question is
from Paul brand from ITV
good afternoon people good afternoon
thank you any extra money for care homes
is of course welcome money but the
funding even aims today as you outlined
is specifically for infection control
care homes are telling us that sadly
when the greatest cost they face from
Kovach 19 is that many of their beds are
now empty how does this money prevent
care homes from closing well the six
hundred million pounds that we're
announcing today will help care homes to
implement some of the further measures
that we were announcing in the support
package that's being published and that
will be focused on infection control as
you say and also around helping them to
reduce the amount of rotation of staff
between care homes but it builds upon
3.2 billion pounds of funding that we've
given in the last two months to local
councils the vast majority of which 90%
of which has gone to those councils with
responsibility for adult social care so
there's almost four billion pounds of
additional funding that's been given to
councils to help them meet the very
significant additional costs that
they're facing to do the things that
we've asked of them to meet the
challenge of coronavirus we're obviously
working very closely with those councils
and we're
the care sector and if there's further
funding that's required then obviously
we'll consider that in the weeks and
months ahead we need to ensure they have
the support which is partly financial
but it goes beyond that as well and the
package includes ensuring that care
homes including those smaller
independent homes also have expert
advice from Council's from public health
professionals and from the NHS to ensure
they've got the best infection control
access to testing the right put
protective equipment and are making use
of the new discharge policies so that
residents are only arriving or returning
at the home once we know that they're
free of kovat 19:00 I don't have any
that anything you'd like to add on the
package that we're bringing forward
first yes from a clinical perspective
NHS England already had a plan of
enhanced support for care homes in
progress but in fact that has been
brought forward and there's a lot of
joint working to ensure that each care
home that there is a clinical lead in
each area who can then oversee and
provide specialist advice and I know I I
don't have the figures here but there's
been a lot of training the trainers for
example around infection control which
is an important element and directors of
Public Health's who are very critical in
local authorities they will work between
the adult social care directors and
between local public health teams will
be increasingly taking a leading role in
oversight of that many of them are
already but I think it's just pulling
all these things together gives that
added assurance that there is
consistency across the patch but I think
going back to the earlier point these
are all elements that were generally in
place though every care home has an
infection control policy it's it's an
added focus to it though and I think we
do recognize in some smaller care homes
for example it can be quite difficult to
maintain specialist skills so having
this extra clinical support and advice
going in or available to people is a
really important step thanks the content
with that Paul or give a follow up
question just so just a quick one I mean
as you know community secretary some of
the funding isn't getting through to
care homes
being passed on by councils canceled say
they have enough money and the money
you've announced today is specifically
for infection control wouldn't it be
better to allow the care homes to spend
the money on whatever they need to spend
the money on because some of them are
closing the reported last night on one
which has now new resident status well
we want to ensure that care homes are
financially sustainable through this
crisis and that's why we've given the
3.2 billion pounds so far and now this
additional six hundred million pounds
councils are under a lot of pressure and
we're asking a lot of them to do a whole
range of tasks to support us in the
national effort at the moment but it is
essential that they get that money
through to the front line as quickly as
possible and we're going to be making
sure there's 600 million pounds gets to
care homes as quickly as we possibly can
so that it can help them to put in place
some of the important measures that
we've just talked about thanks very much
Paul our next question is from Andy Bell
from channel 5 Andy gluttony
a week I think we can hear you Andy I'm
afraid you might be you might have muted
yourself try again
thanks Andy can you hear me now great we
can mister generate the the government
has said that parents will not be
penalized if they choose not to send
their children back to school because
they're worried well the same apply to
staff if they are concerned about what
is happening in schools next month or
will they simply be expected to go back
to work and dr. Harris do you agree with
the Prime Minister today that it's
premature to have international
comparisons on death rates and if so
what has changed since you are happy to
stand at that podium and make those
comparisons in recent weeks well thank
you Andy well the education sector is
working very closely with the trades
unions with teaching professionals to
ensure that they are comfortable and
have sufficient guidance to return to
the workplace many teachers have been
working of course in those schools that
have remained open ensuring that the
children of key workers and vulnerable
children are given schooling during the
lockdown measures and we're very
grateful to those teachers for doing
that but we're going to keep on working
with the trade unions to provide as much
comfort as we possibly can with a view
to getting schools open as quickly as
possible and towards the timetable that
the Prime Minister set out at the
weekend Jenny thank you so I think
you're referring for views benefits to a
slide the slide set has changed slightly
I as a scientist as a professional I
work on a basis of transparency of data
absolutely delighted to discuss death
statistics comparisons over on whatever
occasion is necessary but I think there
is no reason why the death data can't be
produced here and it's available in
public there are a number of new reports
actually which I think are adding
insight and so it's becoming very clear
that there are a lot of facets to
understanding death data so for example
the Office for National Statistics data
a number of reports coming through which
the public can have access to and look
at those so I think there is no
suggestion that the death data cannot
be available and and it is in a number
of different places the main point I
think of your question was around
comparisons and you will know that I
have stood here very often but I think a
whole range of other professionals chief
scientific adviser chief medical officer
in Dimond as well and highlighted some
of the risks of doing this so I think
all of us professionally are very clear
that because death data is collected in
very different ways in different
countries particularly at the moment
because the rate of testing is very
different and because we're still
understanding the risks to different
stratas of the population so by age or
by other risk variables the only really
good comparison in the longer term
overall will be to look back at all
cause mortality so that's a deaths from
any cause at all whether it be confirmed
or not and look at that when it's
adjusted for age of a population that
accounts for whether a particular
country has a very high proportion of
older people and therefore expect more
deaths but also to be seasonally
adjusted as well if possible because we
know for example in in normal times when
we don't have Co vyd that we will see
excess deaths through a flu season so
all of those things are important we're
not quite there yet and in fact the
pandemic is still moving at different
times in different countries so the time
to do this on an international scale
will be to look back probably 12 months
hence still and then do the comparison
it's always good to keep looking on the
way and to see if you can learn and we
do that but that's the time I think to
do it and it will be all calls mortality
thank you and Andy would like to follow
up on either those questions yes mister
generally I mean do you especially mr.
journey understand why people might find
a little strange that that particular
slide and those comparisons have
disappeared at this point well we want
to be as transparent as we possibly can
we believe that the way that we now
report death is amongst the most clear
and transparent of any advanced country
will you record deaths in all settings
and as
jenny has said making international
comparisons is very difficult to do with
accuracy at this moment in time that
doesn't mean that it's not worthwhile
and that there aren't lessons to be
learned from our performance and now it
appears to relate to those of other
countries but accurate predict
comparisons will be for the months to
come and we're able to look at that
measure of excess deaths in the way that
Jenny's just set out and that that day
isn't isn't now but we'll keep on
reporting the statistics as
transparently
as we can and the new slides that you've
seen this evening set out some further
measures that I think will be very
interesting for the public thank you
very much
Andy and the next question is from
Gordon Rayner from The Telegraph
good afternoon Gordon thank you Thank
You Secretary of State a question for
dr. Harris on schools the the French
government has said that children are
safer at school than they are at home
and I just wondered if dr. Harris might
be able to tell us statistically
speaking which is more dangerous for
children being in school at the moment
or the journey to school whether it's on
foot or by public transport or by car
and just a question of view secretary of
state we reported in the Daily Telegraph
this morning that the Treasury is
working on the assumption that
coronavirus will increase the deficit to
337 billion pounds this year at this
stage has the government ruled out any
of the possible ways of funding this
such as tax increases scrapping the
triple lock on pensions or public sector
bakeries well let me answer Gordon that
last question for turning to Jenny those
are matters for the Chancellor and he
will no doubt return some of those
questions in future fiscal events if he
wishes but he was very clear yesterday
that coronavirus is having a profound
impact upon the economy here in the UK
as it is in economies all over the world
you're seeing people losing their jobs
you're seeing stress and harm to
businesses large and small the
unprecedented measures that we brought
for
would form the furlough scheme to the
bounce back loans the Sieber loans and
so on are all designed to protect as
many people and businesses as we
possibly can we know we won't be able to
protect everyone and everyone's business
but we'll do as much as we can and will
stand behind as many people and
businesses as it's possible to do it is
important that where it's safe to do so
we do begin to cautiously reopen and
restart aspects of the economy and today
I've announced a very significant step
in that direction with the reopening of
the housing market and that I hope is an
example of how we can safely get more
people back to work and ensure the
economy starts to get going again Jenny
thank you and you actually gave quite a
broad question I think I'm presuming
it's in relation to coronavirus as well
as the the other issues and I can't
comment I'm not particularly familiar
with the French school system apart from
knowing that they probably have slightly
different age groups and day timing so I
think the important point here is where
where are children going to flourish and
to balance out those risks and
opportunities and I think it's really
important not just to think about
infection control which is our prime
conversation often these days and risk
of disease transmission but also about
some of the wider public health issues
so vulnerable children particularly are
benefited hugely from being at school
and having a safe environment there and
obviously that schooling has continued
equally important that children at
particular phases of their education
don't miss out because in terms of
health risks if a child in early years
doesn't grasp the basics of Education
and feels comfortable in that
environment actually you can predict
that their whole life chances their
economic prosperity and that based
largely on their ability to move into
healthy good employed work will affect
their long-term health so I think we
shouldn't just be thinking of what is
happening this minute but what happens
over a child's lifetime and how
important
and then in terms of risk of
transmission in some there are a few
other scenarios were infectious disease
is quite interesting because the school
environment is quite controlled and
actually when children at home they
potentially behave in different ways and
it can be in when social distance is in
isn't around obviously they can mix more
and so the balance of risk is not as
clear either often with the child at
home or at school so a number of issues
there we do know that overall children
appear to have less what we know they
have less severe disease we can see that
from the data and they're certainly not
transmitting this disease any more than
adults do there's some indication that
younger children particularly are if you
like a safer group and that is coming
out and I think reflected in a number of
European school policies but I think
your other point was around getting to
school as well and the modelling that's
been done one of the critical features
is not just about the disease risk and
transmission actually the really
important thing is the social behaviors
of the children when they get to school
so for younger children they tend to be
closer staying in their own areas
potentially walking or being buggy to
school for older children teenagers
they're tending to move across
boundaries using a lot of public
transport that sort of saying so I think
you know there are other great
opportunities here as well there are
really good opportunities for children
to get good health benefits from school
walking buses rather than an actual
school bus so really long quite a long
question long answer but I think needs
to be a really balanced one and thinking
not just about our risks now but
balancing those with the risks of the
child's whole future thanks Jenni does
that comprehensive answer from Jenni
answer your question Gordon or would you
like to come back it does I was the only
thing I was going to ask you Secretary
of State was it if the if the schools
don't reopen on June the 1st or some of
the unions are asking how much of an
effect that will have on your plans for
economic recovery well I think it is
important for schools to return when
it's when it's safe to do so
anyone who is a parent knows the
challenges of homeschooling and so on
and it's important that we get children
back into the school setting for all the
reasons that Jenny's set out but we will
keep working with the trade unions our
door is always open to them and gabby
williams and the education sector will
do everything he can to reach an
agreement with them so that staff can
feel comfortable in the workplace which
is absolutely right thank you
our next question is from Dominic etemon
from Metro Dominic good afternoon hello
Secretary of State I'm care homes were
told until March the 13th that it was
quite very unlikely that any of their
residents would become infected and only
on that date were they advised to review
their visiting policies did you neglect
the risk to the care sector and
prioritize the NHS expense of the old
well Thank You Dominic Jenny can set out
how an outbreak is managed and how
discharge and testing policies have been
developed over time which i think is the
heart of your question shall I explain
that and then you could you can come
back I mean I think it's really
important that there's an understanding
of how a public health incident is
managed so whether it be Cove in 1900 or
any other issue there is a relationship
between the local health protection team
who will always advise on outbreaks and
work with local health and care systems
to do that so if the case arose so that
any any symptomatic individual would
have been assessed if it looks as if
there is an outbreak although we're
doing much more testing now with more
knowledge of the disease that's grown
over the last few weeks it would be
normal policy to start with to test say
up to 5 residents symptomatic residents
once you can identify what the disease
is we're talking covered here but it
might be flu another year then it's
easier to understand what the proportion
of illness is in that care home so it's
not just it goes back to a point I made
earlier in this briefing it's not just
about the testing
the discharge policy it's about the
systems of care that are in place this
is the fundamental building fundamental
building blocks of managing infectious
disease in a care home but I think in
the context of the point you were making
throughout this outbreak and it would be
the same for any other we look at the
background epidemiology of disease and I
think the document referred to as a
public health England document they will
be monitoring background disease and so
that document will be looking at where
we knew there was a background risk of
transmission so if it's sustained
community transmission then it's at that
point that you might expect cases to be
appearing in other environments and the
same applies you step up the alert
system and then step it back down again
obviously we're still we're still at the
top now and I think in between that time
and now there have been a number of
different steps so the point I made
earlier about advising discharge into an
isolation period for an elderly person
is another example of that particular
management of care so I think it needs
to be taken in the background of what
the epidemiology was at the time of the
incident or the advice and that will
apply to any documents which public
health England has produced and I think
at that time we we did not recognize
there was any sustained community
transmission we clearly had cases around
dr. Jenny Harris there we're going to
leave that daily briefing with Jenny
Harris and Robert generic in a moment
it's the BBC News at 6 with George
elegan now though weather
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News